KIC: feat: add introduction about combined service from different httproutes (#8270)
Kong/docs.konghq.com: app/_src/kubernetes-ingress-controller/reference/combined-services-from-different-httproutes.md

---

> title: Combined Services From Different HTTPRoutes 

Author: Updated the title.

> type: reference

Reviewer: I'm not 100% convinced if reference is the best place for this.
Is this maybe a doc in observability that is more generic. "How services gets translated" and we explain both methods? I would love to hear @lena-larionova 's opinion on this :)

Author: IMO this page (and the potential "How services are translated") is more suitable to be in references than observability. I think the "observability" directory is for pages for introducing how could users know "What happens in KIC", while the page is more likely to introduce how KIC works.

purpose: |
  Introduce the feature gate to consolidate {{site.base_gateway}} services by combining rules from different HTTPRoutes
alpha: true
---

As have been done to `Ingress`es, {{site.kic_product_name}} can consolidate rules from different `HTTPRoute`s with the same
combination of backend services and translate them into one {{site.base_gateway}} service to reduce the number of {{site.base_gateway}} services.
The feature is enabled when the feature gate `CombinedServicesFromDifferentHTTPRoutes` is set to `true`.
When the feature is enabled, The rules with the same combination of backend services (combination of namespace, name, port and weight in `backendRefs` of rules)

> in all `HTTPRoute`s within the same namespace will be translated to one {{site.base_gateway}} service.

Reviewer: I think it might be easier to explain first what happens without this feature gate. Then explain what happens with this feature gate to finally explain how to enable it.

Or maybe roughly like:

## What's this feature gate does?

Without this feature gate, each combination of route/service/backend ends up being a different gateway service.
When this feature gate is enabled combination of namespace, name, port and weight in `backendRefs` of rules 
across all `HTTPRoute`s within the same namespace will be translated to one {{site.base_gateway}} service.

## How to turn it on

The feature is enabled when the feature gate `CombinedServicesFromDifferentHTTPRoutes` is set to `true`.

## How translation is done ( was _Changes on Translated {{site.base_gateway}} Service Names_)

Author: Updated.

## Changes on Translated {{site.base_gateway}} Service Names

> The names of translated {{site.base_gateway}} service will be changed when the feature is enabled. Instead of generating names from source `HTTPRoute`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The names of the translated {{site.base_gateway}} service will be changed when the feature is enabled. Instead of generating names from source `HTTPRoute`
```

and rules, the {{site.base_gateway}} service names will be generated from the consolidated backends.

> ### Calculate Service Name

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Compute Service Name
```

While Calculate is technically correct, it's not really used outside of maths I believe.

> Names of {{site.base_gateway}} services will be calculated from the namespace, name, port and weight(if specified). The pattern of names is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Names of {{site.base_gateway}} services will be computed from the namespace, name, port and weight(if specified). The pattern of names is
```

Author: done.

`httproute.<namespace>.svc.<backend_ns>.<backend_name>.<backend_port>.[backend_weight]_[next_backends]...` where:
 - `namespace` is the namespace of the `HTTPRoute`s.
 - `backend_ns` is the namespace of the first backend service.
 - `backend_name` is the name of the first backend service.
 - `backend_port` is the port number of the first backend service.

>  - `backend_weight` is the weight  of the first backend service if specified.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 - `backend_weight` is the weight of the first backend service if specified.
```

>  - `next_backends` are sections calculated from other backend services. Backend services are sorted by the namespace and name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - `next_backends` are sections computed from other backend services. Backend services are sorted by the namespace and name.
```

For example, the following two `HTTPRoute`s with rules pointing to the same backends with the same ports and weights:

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: HTTPRoute
metadata:
  name: httproute-consolidated-1
  namespace: default
spec:
  parentRefs:
  - name: kong
  rules:
  - matches:
    - path:
        type: PathPrefix
        value: /httproute-testing
    backendRefs:
    - name: echo-1
      kind: Service
      port: 80
      weight: 75
    - name: echo-2
      kind: Service
      port: 8080
      weight: 25
---
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: HTTPRoute
metadata:
  name: httproute-consolidated-2
  namespace: default
spec:
  parentRefs:
  - name: kong
  rules:
  - matches:
    - path:
        type: PathPrefix
        value: /httproute-testing
    backendRefs:
    - name: echo-1
      kind: Service
      port: 80
      weight: 75
    - name: echo-2
      kind: Service
      port: 8080
      weight: 25
```

> The two rules from the two `HTTPRoute`s `httproute-consolidated-1` and `httproute-consolidated-2` will be translated to one {{site.base_gateway}} service

Author: Added the comparison of translated services with the feature gate on/off.

with name `httproute.default.svc.default.echo-1.80.75.default.echo-2.80.25`.

### Trimming {{site.base_gateway}} Service Names

> Technically, the calculated name from the method in the section above can be too long. So when the calculate name is longer than 512 characters(the limit of service name length in {{site.konnect_short_name}}),

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Technically, the calculated name from the method in the section above can be too long. So when the calculated name is longer than 512 characters (the limit of service name length in {{site.konnect_short_name}}),
```

> Technically, the calculated name from the method in the section above can be too long. So when the calculated name is longer than 512 characters (the limit of service name length in {{site.konnect_short_name}}),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the computed name from the method above is longer than 512 characters(the limit of service name length in {{site.konnect_short_name}}), the service name is trimmed using the following rules
```

> the service name is trimmed to make sure that the translated service name does not exceed 512 characters. The trimmed name will only preserve the information(namespace, name, port, weight) of the first backend service,

Reviewer: - trim the name to only preserve namespace, name, port and weight (which will always be under 512 characters)
- append `_combined.<hash>` to it. Where `hash` is the first X characters of the SHA256 digest of the computed service name.

Reviewer: name, port and weight ?  Should probably be `backend_name, backend_port and backend_weight` and namespace is namespace or backend_ns ? It's worth being clear and use the same naming methods in both places.

Author: Done.

---
title: Combining Services From Different HTTPRoutes 
type: reference
purpose: |
  Introduce the feature gate to consolidate {{site.base_gateway}} services by combining rules from different HTTPRoutes
alpha: true
---

> As have been done to `Ingress`es, {{site.kic_product_name}} can consolidate rules from different `HTTPRoute`s having the same

Reviewer: Or just remove these 2 lines and switch `How to enable` and `What Does the feature do`

> As have been done to `Ingress`es, {{site.kic_product_name}} can consolidate rules from different `HTTPRoute`s having the same

Author: Done.

combination of backend services and translate them into one {{site.base_gateway}} service to reduce the number of {{site.base_gateway}} services.

## How to Enable the Feature?

> The feature is enabled when the feature gate `CombinedServicesFromDifferentHTTPRoutes` is set to `true`.

Author: Added the link.

## What Does the Feature Gate Do?
When the feature is enabled, The rules having the same combination of backend services (combination of namespace, name, port and weight in `backendRefs` of rules)
in all `HTTPRoute`s within the same namespace will be translated to one {{site.base_gateway}} service.

## How the Translation is Done?

The names of the translated {{site.base_gateway}} service will be changed when the feature is enabled. Instead of generating names from source `HTTPRoute`
and rules, the {{site.base_gateway}} service names will be generated from the consolidated backends.

### Compute Service Name

Names of {{site.base_gateway}} services will be computed from the namespace, name, port and weight(if specified). The pattern of names is
`httproute.<namespace>.svc.<backend_ns>.<backend_name>.<backend_port>.[backend_weight]_[next_backends]...` where:
 - `namespace` is the namespace of the `HTTPRoute`s.
 - `backend_ns` is the namespace of the first backend service.
 - `backend_name` is the name of the first backend service.
 - `backend_port` is the port number of the first backend service.
 - `backend_weight` is the weight of the first backend service if specified.

>  - `next_backends` are sections computed from other backend services. Backend services are sorted by the namespace and name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - `next_backends` are sections computed from other backend services. Backend services are sorted by the namespace and name.
 
In addition, When the computed name from the method above is longer than 512 characters (the limit of service name length in {{site.konnect_short_name}}), the service name is trimmed using the following rules:
- Only use `backend_ns`, `backend_name`,`backend_port`, `backend_weight` of the first backend service,
- Append the `_combined.<hash>` to make sure that the name is unique. Where `hash` is the SHA256 digest of the computed service name.
```

We keep the entire hash then? All 40 chars?

Author: Yes. Considering that after trimming the service name to contain only the first backend, we have the room for the full hash.

For example, the following two `HTTPRoute`s with rules pointing to the same backends with the same ports and weights:

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: HTTPRoute
metadata:
  name: httproute-consolidated-1
  namespace: default
spec:
  parentRefs:
  - name: kong
  rules:
  - matches:
    - path:
        type: PathPrefix
        value: /httproute-testing
    backendRefs:
    - name: echo-1
      kind: Service
      port: 80
      weight: 75
    - name: echo-2
      kind: Service
      port: 8080
      weight: 25
---
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: HTTPRoute
metadata:
  name: httproute-consolidated-2
  namespace: default
spec:
  parentRefs:
  - name: kong
  rules:
  - matches:
    - path:
        type: PathPrefix
        value: /httproute-testing
    backendRefs:
    - name: echo-1
      kind: Service
      port: 80
      weight: 75
    - name: echo-2
      kind: Service
      port: 8080
      weight: 25
```

> When the feature is not enabled, the rules in the two `HTTPRoutes` will be translated

Reviewer: Better to use present tense in the second part of your sentence

See what Claude has to say about this for .e.g:

> Let's analyze these options carefully:
"When the feature is disabled, the rules in the two HTTPRoutes will be translated to two distinct services"
vs.
"When the feature is disabled, the rules in the two HTTPRoutes are translated to two distinct services"
The second version using the present tense ("are translated") is better because:

> It describes an immediate, direct consequence of the feature being disabled, making it clearer that this is the default system behavior
Technical documentation conventionally uses the present tense for describing system behaviors and states
It's more concise while conveying the same information
Present tense makes the documentation feel more authoritative and definitive

> The future tense ("will be translated") could imply that the translation happens at some future point rather than being an immediate, automatic behavior of the system.

> When the feature is not enabled, the rules in the two `HTTPRoutes` will be translated

Author: Changed to present tense.

> to two {{site.base_gateway}} services separately.

Author: done.

> The names of the services will be `httproute.default.httproute-consolidated-1.0` and `httproute.default.httproute-consolidated-2.0`.

Author: done.

> When the feature is enabled, The two rules from the two `HTTPRoute`s `httproute-consolidated-1` and `httproute-consolidated-2` will be translated to one {{site.base_gateway}} service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the feature is enabled, The two rules from the two `HTTPRoute`s `httproute-consolidated-1` and `httproute-consolidated-2` result in a single {{site.base_gateway}} service named `httproute.default.svc.default.echo-1.80.75.default.echo-2.80.25`.
```

Author: done.

The translated service name will computed by the rules above, resulting to the name `httproute.default.svc.default.echo-1.80.75.default.echo-2.80.25`.

> ### Trimming {{site.base_gateway}} Service Names

Reviewer: As I made the suggestion higher up, I think you can't show an example and then add more details to the algorithm. I'd move this to when you define the rest of the algorithm
